A report published by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2003 highlighted that noncompliance (or nonadherence) to long-term treatment was a worldwide problem detrimental to the overall effectiveness of the health system [1]. Compliance is defined in this report as the degree of correspondence between a patient’s behavior (taking medications, following hygiene rules, and diet) and the recommendations made by a health care professional (HCP). Noncompliance with these recommendations has an impact on patients’ quality of life (QoL), outcomes, and health costs.
The WHO identified several causes of nonadherence to therapies, including the characteristics of the health system, the patient’s disease, and the course of treatment. For patients with depression, observance is linked to the frequency of administration of a drug and to concomitant therapy. For patients suffering from cancer, the fear of adverse effects (AEs) related to the treatment has negative impact on adherence. For diabetic patients, adherence may vary with age, sex, and the relationship with the physician. Several meta-analyses showed that current methods of improving medication adherence for chronic diseases were mostly complex and not very effective [2,3]. The Cochrane group concluded that (1) means to measure adherence more systematically and objectively and (2) innovations to assist patients to follow medication prescriptions for long-term medical disorders were major points to be considered in that field. Considering social media as platforms where patients can discuss about their treatments and share testimonies, they could be a new data source to measure adherence to treatment.
The use of social media allows large groups of people to create and share information, opinions, and experiences about health conditions and medications through discussions [4]. Social media provide pharmacovigilance experts with a relevant source of information [5]. The example of benfluorex [6] illustrated how social media could be valuable sources for experts. Methods to identify messages with adverse events mentions have been developed (eg, [7]).
Social media holds a lot of promise in improving communication and patient engagement [8]. Horvath et al [9] and Taggart et al [10] showed that information sharing and socializing with others were the criteria most often cited when HIV patients describe an ideal social network. Wang et al [11] modeled the discussions and interests of users of a forum for pregnant women using a topic model and showed that the women were sharing their experiences, fears, and concerns about medications. Stellefson et al [12] reviewed Web 2.0 interventions proposing a program of self-management to patients older than 50 years for their chronic disease. Patients highlighted the benefit of interacting with other patients. For example, sharing information through social networks enabled patients to communicate better with HCPs. Patients often use social media to discuss drug side effects and adherence to therapies. Mao et al [13] studied the messages from breast cancer patients treated by aromatase inhibitors. A total of 18.17% (4589/25,256) of the posts mentioned at least one adverse effect, and almost 12.8%
(110/862) of the individuals mentioned discontinuing aromatase inhibitors. Chary et al [14] studied correlations between geographic distribution of prescription opioid misuse estimated from social media and the National Survey on Drug Usage and Health (NSDUH). They concluded that mentions of drug misuse on Twitter correlated strongly with the NSDUH estimates of opioid misuse.
Social media may even impact treatment adherence. In the study by Horvath et al [15], the results of a Web-based survey for HIV patients showed that 52.6% (164/312) of the participants were considered noncompliant. The meta-analysis published by Taggart et al [10] identified 2 studies on HIV populations that demonstrated a link between the use of social media and the improvement of compliance to treatment among users. Moreover, Mao et al [13] showed that breast cancer patients offer practical strategies to deal with drug side effects and provide support to each other. For example, 28.10% (7097/25,256) of the posts mentioned some method for addressing their aromatase inhibitor-related arthralgia, including exercising and pharmaceuticals, whether prescribed or over the counter.
Analysis of a huge number of narratives requires automated text mining techniques [5]. These techniques have been used to extract information from electronic health records. For example, Topaz et al [16] mined clinical narratives to identify heart failure patients who did not comply with their treatment. As for health records, detection of nonadherence behaviors in social media also requires text mining techniques.
Topic models could be used to discover hidden semantic structures in large sets of messages from social media. They could provide deeper exploration of nonadherence behaviors. This exploration is based on patient testimonies of their own decisions about drugs in real life.